---
layout: post
title: Blockchain 101
description: "Understanding the blockchain as fundamental to cryptocurrencies"
categories: [Tech]
tags: [blockchain, decentralization]
---

***What’s special about blockchain? How does it work? Why will it change the world? Read on to mine a better understanding of this disruptive technology. ***


# Follow the money trail

Blockchain came to its present prominence primarily as a form of digital currency - the bitcoin. It is important enough that at the risk of redundancy we state (again) - Bitcoin does not equal blockchain! Bitcoin is one of several cryptocurrencies, and all these cryptocurrencies are basically different implementations of blockchain technology.. But anyone not living under a rock will know this already! Though it isn't the same, cryptocurrency does offer a tangible way of explaining the concept so we shall start from there. Besides, that’s also how Vitalik Buterin started thinking about Ethereum. So here we go!


What is money? - it is a token of common value. Money doesn’t inherently have any value, we’ve all just decided that it is a good enough representation of it. We trust our government (who trusts the RBI) to issue and maintain our currency - the Rupee, which is our government’s brand of money. So essentially money itself is made up, and all banks (other than the RBI) essentially do is make sure all the made up tokens are accounted for. Physical notes are not easily duplicated, but when we get to the digital world, things get a lot trickier! An economy is basically a lot of transactions where agents exchange money for goods and services. We’re all trying to get what we want and money is the common medium for value.

Satoshi Nakamoto’s initial motivation described in his paper “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System” was for a system that allowed transfer of value between two parties without the need for a middle-man, such as banks. Aside from the unfair advantage that financial institutions possess by being central authorities, it is wasteful to employ their services for small amounts of money that we often exchange in our day-to-day transactions. When you pay with your card at a shopping mall, or use internet banking on Amazon, the Visa and MasterCard companies of the world take a percentage off of every transaction. This is necessary to prevent malicious activity like double-spending or misrepresentation of services. So how does a cryptocurrency achieve this without a third party? Why, using blockchain technology of course! 

# Trust

The reason we have third parties and central banks regulating and arbitrating money is that we need some entity to place trust in. We trust our government. We trust the law. Our economic system is based on trust. Imagine 2016’s demonetisation happened without the government informing a major portion of the public.. You wake up one day and find that all that you’ve worked so hard for is now just colored rectangles of paper. You can’t exchange it for gold, goods, services, or any other currency. This technically could happen, but we trust our government enough to take for granted that it won’t. We trust that when we enter our details and authorize a transaction, the merchant will not charge us for more than they should. We trust a lot more than we consciously notice.

With cryptocurrencies, we don’t need trust. This is a design goal for cryptocurrencies, and blockchain technology in general. Trust, while heartwarmingly reaffirming of the good in the world, when it isn’t broken, can be disastrous when it is. Rationally, it makes sense to reduce risk as much as possible. Hence, it is a good idea to eliminate the need for trust, while still maintaining reliability and preventing malicious activity.  

In this context we can examine what trust is, in the first place, and how it plays a role in economic and technological systems. In the most basic description possible, trust is an assurance of reality. When you trust someone, you believe them and allow them to affect how you perceive the world (think Truman Show). While asking someone on the road for directions, this may sometimes lead you to a wrong address, but more often than not there is no way other than trusting another. The world revolves around trust. Even if someone gives you wrong information today, you can verify it for yourself - but what about the past and the future? We implicitly trust historians and books for an account of our ancestors, and trust politicians and policies with our future development. To make the concept of past trust and future trust more relevant, consider the earlier statement that money is made up. Further, consider the case of a digital currency where there are no physical tokens as proof of ownership, with which we wish to have a functional economy. In this case, without a central authority to place trust in, we have two problems: how do we agree on a common reality, and how do we make our economy robust (that is to say, how do we prevent one from fooling many into believing a false reality)?

The first problem has a simple solution. If everyone agrees on the history of transactions, any disagreement or false claims can be settled by majority. So we broadcast transactions publicly and store their order in a common database, or ledger. The ledger itself is the blockchain. Everyone has a copy of it, and everyone is continually updating it. Whose update gets written to history depends on another concept which can be ‘proof of work’ or ‘proof of stake’. This is also the solution to the second problem, as the proof decides reality. Technically we democratizing trust and not eliminating it.. Still, pretty neat, isn’t it? The best part is, it is not limited to a list of transactions, the actual blocks in the blockchain could be about anything! But enough talk about ideas, now we shall discuss implementations!

## Immutable history

So a consensual history sounds fancy, almost utopian, but how do we do that? This is where blockchain comes in, very literally. If you understand this, you understand blockchain. But before that, we must do a quick review of a couple of cryptographic concepts - Hashes & Merkle Trees.

**Hash** - A hash is an output of a special function, called a cryptographic hash function (surprise!) such as SHA2, which has the property that the output is of fixed length for any given length of input. The output is usually much quicker to compute from the input than the other way around. This property is useful for proof of work/stake applications. Ideally, every unique input will give a unique output, which is why it is colloquially called the fingerprint of the data that is being hashed. If we change even one character in a million character input to the hash function, we get a very different output which lets us know that the data has been corrupted/tampered with. 

**Merkle Hash Trees** - The Merkle tree is a data structure where the leaf nodes are labelled with the hash digests of some data, and every other node is labelled with the hash digest of its child nodes. This cascaded hashing allows for storing reduced amounts of hash digest values for a large set of data. Since we are essentially grouping hash digests into a single hash layer by layer, the older unchanging data can be discarded. Version control software like Git use this structure for tracking changes and verifying integrity. 

When it comes to bitcoin, the ledger of transactions are themselves the ‘coin’. A particular number of transactions compose a ‘block’ and this data is then hashed along with the hash from the previous block (and a nonce-junk value). In Bitcoin’s case the proof of work is to determine a nonce value that results in a certain number of zeros at the start of the resulting hash. Whoever finds it first adds their signature to the block and is ‘awarded’ some value, and the updated ledger is published so everyone can copy it and race to find the next block. In this way, the history of transactions is being recorded in a series of hashes. The slightest change to any detail of the past will ripple through and make every block after it look different. And since everyone on the network has a copy, unless you control more than half the network, you can’t change history! 


Let’s say we have a hypothetical hash function that produces 64-bit hex codes. (This offers too few possibilities to be practically useful, but let’s go with it for the sake of understanding.) We are using it to create a blockchain for the content of a sequential book, so that we don’t have to check it for errors at multiple stages. We supply the first chapter as input and obtain the digest - 8fa3. This string is appended to the second chapter and hashed to obtain the second digest - 4e32 (which represents the content of both chapter 1 and 2 uniquely). As we write this third chapter, we notice an extra question mark in the first chapter where it shouldn’t be. Now we must go back, correct the text, and pass it to the hash function again. This time we obtain b402, even though only one character was changed. Similarly we redo the second chapter’s hash with the correct hash from chapter one to obtain cd7c. What we just did is called a fork - we altered history because we were the only ones using the blockchain. On a practical distributed blockchain, this is NOT supposed to happen unless there is something really wrong and everyone (or a majority) agrees to it. This is how some hundred million dollar’s worth of Ether was recovered last year after being lost to a hack. Though the hacker was successful in stealing the funds, the beauty of the blockchain’s design meant that everyone could see where the loot went. The only problem was that no one could access it (without the thief’s signature/private key). Aside aside, assuming we have successfully completed the FastTrack and sent it for print along with the blockchain ledger, we no longer have to recheck everything anymore - we just hash our final chapters one by one again and compare them with the blockchain!


This concept of chaining blocks of data through time using cryptographic hash functions is the fundamental understanding of a blockchain. In the case of a cryptocurrency, the data is the list of completed transactions, but it could be anything else. In the case of Ethereum, the data is the computational state of a machine, thus every successive computation is recorded as a state change in the blockchain. In this way, any Turing complete application can be designed to run on an appropriately designed blockchain, like Ethereum. Of course, the details are much more complex than that, but that’s what the developers of the blockchain are for. They build the compiler for the blockchain so users can program decentralized applications in an abstract way. (Simple but powerful applications being around 10 lines of high-level code.)

## Consensus of the past - Timestamping

A blockchain platform inherently maintains a consensus about the transactions or computations that have already occurred. Even though there is no central authority, it achieves this by distributing the authority among its users. Changes are publicly announced and incorporated by everyone in the order they are received. As the data is represented by the hash and all subsequent blocks, the blockchain also serves as a distributed timestamp server. Once the hash of a data block is incorporated into the blockchain, it will be replicated across the entire network. All successive blocks in the chain are dependent on this and since the hash is unique to the data, it is undeniable proof that the data existed at the time of incorporation into the blockchain. In essence, blockchain technology employs a linear cause and effect model to record events, and verifies truth by distributed consensus. What happened in the blockchain, stays on the blockchain!


## Consensus of the future - Smart Contracts

However, this distributed consensus platform is not only useful for past events, but future events as well. In the blockchain we have a distributed ledger that cannot be changed. This is like a permanent record of your words. The words themselves, may be talking about the future, like making a promise! Promises and trust are very related, as trustworthy people are defined as those who keep their promises. Promises can also be viewed as future transactions, as the person making the promise gets something in return for keeping their promise. In the human world, we can make selfless promises, but we still obtain trust in return, if nothing else. With blockchain, the issue of accountability of promises is taken care of by the property of being distributed, but the issue of trust resides further away in time (when the promise is/isn’t fulfilled) and cannot be immediately resolved by virtue of being distributed. 

Enter the _Turing complete blockchain_. With the capability to build a program that lives in the blockchain, we can design ‘Smart Contracts’. In the simplest case, imagine a transaction inside an if statement. Perhaps there is also a deadline in the condition, This transaction is only fulfilled when the conditions are met, and not otherwise, because that is the way a smart contract works. There is no need for a third party, or even for the two parties to worry about verifying the terms of the contract. As long as the contract is formulated keeping all necessary conditions in mind, a smart contract can be deployed using the blockchain that will basically take care of itself. 
 

# Re-Decentralization - DAOs

Combining all these wonderful features of blockchain we can envision another type of entity that lives on the blockchain platform - the decentralized autonomous organization, or DAO. We’ve tried to use the word decentralized as less as possible in our explanation because using buzzwords before getting a grasp of the issue tends to get in the way of real understanding. If you’ve been paying attention and feel your neurons firing, you may have beat us to the buzzer. 

An organization is a meta-agent with an agenda, having access to a pool of resources, run by a collection of agents. These agents are usually of two types, when it concerns the functioning of the organization - governing agents and executive agents. Governing agents make decisions on behalf of the organization and executive agents enact them. On a blockchain, a well designed collection of (self-preserving) smart contracts can serve as both. Tie its access to a pool of resources needed to function and survive, and you have created an autonomous entity that carries out transactions/events in response to certain criteria and according to the rules specified in the smart contract. Once adequately designed and deployed, it functions on its own without need for human interference.

Blockchain technology is already being applied to various industries as we explore in the latter chapters, and that’s only the ones people have thought of so far.. The possibilities are almost endless! Imagine a decentralized file storage service where you get paid according to how much data you store. Imagine an application that budgeted the government’s tax money according to a combination of criteria determined by political science experts and democratic voting by members of the blockchain. No chance for siphoning or bribing = bye bye corruption! Of course, that’s merely a dream, but it is a dream worth dreaming don’t you think? 

Is blockchain as big as the internet? **Not even close..** But it does have the potential to reshape it. When the internet was being born, it began decentralized. Since then however, the capitalist ecosystem created an extremely centralized internet with a few big players getting all the traffic, and all the data. Since data is the modern resource, the world does indeed need to be brought to balance again, and blockchain is definitely a way to go. Like, why should Facebook profit off your life? Steemit is a fairer world. 

The existence of blockchain is a promise in itself, a promise of a better world. Quite in the theme of things, it is upto all of us to decide which version of reality becomes immutable history. The main type of transaction that needs to be carried out is a value (read: data) transfer, away from the central giants, the Googles and Amazons. More than anything, blockchain technology is motivated by a direction - Power to the Edge!
